should two GCAM runs with different parameters have the same demand by decile in the base year?

no.

in the base year, both runs will have the same incomes in each decile, and the same prices. however, since parameters (including the FEs) are different, the demand functions without bias correction will predict different levels of demand for each decile, and therefore different regional average demand, and different regional bias adders. those bias terms are added identically to each decile. thus each decile's demand will consist of two parts: the part produced by the demand function without bias correction, and the bias adder, and both parts will differ between the two GCAM runs.

The key issue is whether the total demand for each decile, or the sum of these two parts, differs between runs. They will, because although income will be distributed over deciles in the same way in the two runs, demand is nonlinear in the parameter values, so with two different sets of parameters, demand will not be distributed the same in the two runs even though income is. The addition of two different bias adders will not offset this nonlinearity, because these terms are added identically to all deciles.

So when we compare two GCAM runs with different parameters to see if they are different due to different parameters (and potentially different prices), we should use regional average demand, not decile-specific demand (because decile specific demand won't be the same between the two runs even in the base year, while region specific demand will). 

should ambrosia and GCAM produce the same demand by decile in the base year when they are both using the same parameters?

in principle yes, but in practice no.

since both models will have the same prices and income for all deciles, and will have the same parameters, they should produce the same demand without bias adders, and therefore the same bias adders. thus the two outcomes by decile should be the same. the two models go about this somewhat differently, but in principle this should still be true.

my current understanding:

for historical years, ambrosia estimates demand for all deciles given incomes and prices. it then calculates regional demand as an average per cap consumption, and compares to observations (actually, it currently compares to historical values from an available scenario, eg the Ref_ML scenario, which itself uses historical bias terms from GCAM, which was calibrated to observations). It calculates the regional bias adder, and then applies it equally to all deciles. 

GCAM, in its data system, uses ambrosia to do the same thing just described. it then passes this decile-specific demand to the main model, and the model uses it to calibrate to at the decile level. that is, GCAM calculates demand given the parameters and no bias term, and then compares decile level demand to the decile demand from the data system, and calculates decile level bias terms. in principle, these bias terms should be the same ones calculated by the data system (ie, ambrosia), but in practice they are not, because the GCAM solutions for the zero bias case are not always the same as for ambrosia. it's not quite clear why not; pralit says it is because it is solving for budget shares and prices simultaneously with the larger market solution, but to me this means that somehow the solver uses prices and demands that can be inconsistent with one another (where consistency would be via the ambrosia demand system). so I don't fully understand it, but both Kanishka and I have demonstrated that the two models don't produce the same decile level demand in the base year in all cases.